Title: 2012 Spring Running Plan
Date: 2012-03-05 15:47
Author: David Wilemski
Category: Running
Slug: 2012-spring-running-plan
Status: published

Yesterday I \[grudgingly\] took a day off of running. After waking up
this morning I\'m not sure that it really made a difference but we shall
see tonight when I run. This was the first day I took off in the month
and a half+ since I began training again. The hope is that I\'ll be
fresh enough this week to up my mileage after having 2 weeks of slow,
bad runs and feeling on the edge of injury.

I have a number of goals for the coming few months which I have sort of
referred to previously. This is my attempt at formalizing these goals
and outlining roughly how I plan to get there.

In the immediate term (meaning the next 2-3 months) there are a number
of races I\'d like to Â do and a certain level of training I\'d like to
be at by the end of this time. I don\'t think any of the following is
too unreasonable but I am definitely open to suggestions.

This week I plan on increasing my weekly mileage to 40 miles a week.
Three weeks ago I hit 38 miles (maybe earlier than I planned on) and the
previous two weeks have been 33 and most recently 29 miles. 40 miles,
while not nearly what I hope to top out at, is a good place to maintain
training as I get back into racing and more frequently do workouts.
Additionally I plan on racing the [Shamrocks and Shenanigans
5k](http://www.runshamrocks.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23&Itemid=42)this
Sunday.

Where am I going with all of this?

Essentially, there are a number of races I\'d like to be in between now
and the end of April and I\'d also like to begin increasing my milage
again around the end of April. It is my thinking that while 40 miles
isn\'t *\*that\** much, it should be enough to have a solid running base
in me and begin my journey into regaining some real speed.

I\'ve said before that my two big running goals currently are running a
sub-17 min 5k and just racing a full marathon. My target marathon is the
first ever [Ann Arbor Marathon](http://theannarbormarathon.com/)Â in the
middle of June. In order to reach both of these goals I need to increase
training volume by June and increase intensity so I can build speed.

I think that it is doable (by no means optimal) to race this marathon in
June if I am able to increase my mileage to 50 mpw by the end of April
and maybe even hit 60 before June. I\'ll be spending my time between now
and the end of April focusing on doing more workouts and definitely more
races (almost one every 2 weeks between now and then):

-   Already mentioned [Shamrocks and
    Shenanigans](http://www.runshamrocks.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23&Itemid=42)Â this
    weekend (5k)
-   Potentially [Pantanal in the Arb
    III](http://www.pantanalcer.org/arb-run)Â March 25th (or another
    race around that time) (5k)
-   [Meteor
    10k](http://www.martianmarathon.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=81&Itemid=122)
    at the Martian Festival of Races April 14th (beginning to race
    higher distances in preparation for the marathon)
-   Maybe another race between the 25th and April 14th\...

After that time I think I\'ll plan just 1, maybe 2, races in May and
then focus entirely on the two big races I have planned in June. I\'ll
be focusing on increasing my training volume from 40 mpw to maybe 60 by
the first weeks of June before the Marathon.

I\'ll be racing the Dexter-Ann Arbor Half-Marathon (I [ran the
5k](http://davidwilemski.com/blog/2011/06/race-report-dexter-ann-arbor-5k/ "Race Report: Dexter-Ann Arbor 5K")
last year). I see this as a chance to see where I\'m at two weeks before
the Marathon. It will be my first half and should be a good gauge for my
marathon training. I don\'t really plan on racing it all out but I will
say that I\'m hoping for somewhere in 1:30 - 1:35 by that time. After
this race I\'ll be just holding steady until racing my first marathon
just a few weeks later. The main goal is to finish but the competitive
part of me also wants to do well. I\'m thinking that maybe a target of
around 3:30 is reasonable, but we shall see. If I can do better than
that, great - otherwise I\'ll just focus on finishing. I\'m really
looking forward to this. I don\'t really plan on focusing on marathons
after this, it\'s just a goal to see how far I can push myself. Maybe
I\'ll try and qualify for Boston one day but I\'m not too concerned
about it.

Assuming I can get through all of this without any major issues and no
injuries (something I\'m being very cautious about), I\'ll have
completed one of my two big running goals! How will I complete the
other? Well, I won\'t plan specifics now but in general I\'ll spend the
rest of June recovering and building mileage back to whatever I was at
before the marathon and will hopefully be racing again around the end of
June.

I\'ll reevaluate when the time comes and decide on a more concrete and
specific training and race schedule after what I\'ve just outlined. I
plan on topping out at 70 miles a week and hopefully with that and some
intense speed work I\'ll be putting up some fast 5k times once again by
this fall!

Now back to the daily training!
