Title: Bayshore Half Marathon Race Report
Date: 2013-05-28 09:44
Author: David Wilemski
Tags: Races, Running
Category: blog
Slug: bayshore-half-marathon-race-report
Status: published

This weekend was finally the day I\'d been training almost six months
for: the Bayshore half in Traverse City!

 

The Training
------------

I began base building at the end of December after taking time off from
Fall cross country / road races. I was consistently hitting 50 and 60
mile weeks with a weekly tempo run. By mid February, I was consistently
hitting 70 mile weeks with down weeks in the mid 60 range usually. At
that point I mostly transitioned from tempos to weekly indoor track
workouts with MRun because running workouts with people is better. I
maintained that mileage through outdoor track season which I competed
in, and then just a couple more quality weeks before getting to
Bayshore. The week leading up to Bayshore was probably among the worst
of my training weeks ever - I never felt fresh or healthy and the small
nagging injuries didn\'t seem so small anymore.

[You can view my training long for more
details.](http://openrunlog.org/u/david)

The Race
--------

We woke up early. Very early. The shuttle from our campsite to the
race\'s finish area left at 5am so I was up at around 4:30. I ate a
poptart when I woke up and then about an hour before the race had a
granola bar. When we got to the race\'s packet-pickup/staging area we
then had to take another shuttle out along the bay to the half
marathon\'s starting point (it\'s a point to point race). It was a
pretty cold morning and we got to the start line too early to start
warming up so it was kind of cold standing around. When it was FINALLY
time to start warming up I just did some light jogging for about 10
minutes and then changed into my flats and did just a few strides to
make sure they were tied tight enough. When I got to the start line I
finally saw the rest of my friends on MRun!

The start was a bit weird since they had to synchronize with the
marathon that started 15 minutes earlier and then we were off! The first
mile I was left wondering if I was really on pace since it felt so easy
- I was right on pace but almost none of my training miles felt quite so
easy as that.

For about the first half of the race I was right on target of staying
between 6:00 and 6:10ish with splits of 6:05, 6:08, 6:06, 6:11, 6:14
through mile 5.

About 5.5 miles in I started slowing down a bit and it also happened to
be about the same time that I got stuck in no-man\'s land with nobody to
run with. It wasn\'t that I was dead or even felt that tired but my legs
were heavy and I didn\'t know how I should be feeling and was worried
about crashing later on at mile 10 or 11 so I just tried to keep my
effort up. The number of \"Go Blue!\'s\" that I got from wearing my MRun
singlet from both spectators and marathoners once we crossed paths with
them was astounding and helped me keep going. I even got a \"Go Blue!\"
from the 3rd place marathoner!

Splits for miles 6-12: 6:31, 6:29, 6:29, 6:43, 6:46, 6:42, 6:41

I wouldn\'t say that I ever felt good during this time but I never felt
exhausted either. I guess I\'d say I felt pleasantly exerted. After how
I felt for the last 1.1 miles and the day after, I now know that I could
have probably pushed these miles much more.

Right at the 12 mile mark my friend Caspar caught up with me. We picked
it up for the last mile and I told him we were going to catch the guy
that was up in front of us (who had passed me earlier). My 13th mile was
my fastest mile with a split of 6:04. After I picked it up for that mile
I knew that I had been going to slow for the second half of the race - I
felt like I could have hung on at that pace for another few miles at the
finish.

I ended up finishing with a time of 1:23:57. It wasn\'t quite in my A-B
goal range of 1:18-1:20 but I\'m not disappointed with it either. My
fallback goal was faster than 1:25 and I did just that. In any case, it
left me wanting more.

The Analysis
------------

I\'d say that I ran the first half of the race very well. I went out
conservatively and felt pretty good because of it. I now know that I
could have hung on at that pace for the rest of the race but this one
was a learning experience. A number of friends told me they dropped
about 5 minutes between their first and second time racing a half.
That\'s exactly what I intend to do next time I do one - even though I
don\'t quite know when that might be. Some people are trying to convince
me to do the Detroit half in the Fall but I may just want to focus on
cross country then instead since it\'s my last chance to race cross
country with MRun.

I ended up finishing in 28th place overall and 3rd in my age group. I\'m
reasonably happy with my result but not completely satisfied. I just
keep reminding myself that I\'m still less than a year in to training
competitively again and that I don\'t have that aerobic base from years
of running high mileage in anymore. I\'ll improve with time and
patience.

The Aftermath
-------------

After the race we hung around downtown Traverse City for the day and
even went to the beach! It was a fun day involving pie and other
delicious food. The day after the race we packed up camp and headed
home. When I got home I did what I planned to be an easy 5 miles for
recovery around argo (which just so happens to be my last run in Ann
Arbor until I get back there from San Francisco in the Fall). It started
off nice and easy but I ended up picking up the pace for every mile with
the last two miles in the 7:00 to 6:50 range. I guess I felt pretty good
by the end! Afterwords I felt well enough to go play a couple hours
worth of volleyball and frisbee with some friends (and even biked
there). It was fun but was also yet another sign that I could have run
harder during the race. I just never got that sore after the race - in
fact I felt better immediately after the race than I did during most
weeks of training towards the end of the cycle.

I\'m now going to take a week off of running (maybe try to squeeze in a
long bike ride or two before I fly to California on Friday) and then the
next week will just be easy running every other day. After that, I\'ll
jump right back into training! It will be time to start thinking about
cross country season and I intend on taking full advantage of summer
training! I\'m hoping to run more than I ever have with a peak of high
80s or low 90 mpw to try and have the best season possible.
